docs: Security claims and caveats (#988)
endojs/endo: packages/ses/README.md

console uses these side tables to output more informative diagnostics.
[Logging Errors](./src/error/README.md) explains the design.

> ## Security claims and caveats

Author: All claims should be for the `ses` shim so I’m revising to attempt to signal that typographically.

Provided that the `ses` implementation and its trusted compute base are

> correct, we claim that a host program (Figure 1) can evaluate a guest program

Reviewer: Given the tc39 use of the term "host", if you want to use that here, you need to explain what you mean an do not mean early. Indeed, this text almost adequately explains it by example. But it doesn't impede the misunderstanding.

Reviewer 2: Yeah I'm conflicted. While it's good to make the distinction with guest programs below, the host terminology is a bit overloaded.

Author: Adding a terminology sentence above.

(`program`) in a compartment after `lockdown` and that the program:

- will initially only have access to one mutable object, `globalThis`,

> - specifically cannot modify any primordial object that it shares with the host

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- specifically cannot modify any primordial object that it shares with the host, except that compartment's `globalThis`, which the host has access to.
```

Author: I’m reading `globalThis` as not a shared primordial, for not being shared between compartments and also not primordial since it’s compartment-specific. I think the prior bullet makes that clear.

  program
- cannot perform any I/O, apart from I/O performed within the trusted compute

>   base, directly or indirectly,

Author: Rephrasing this like (apart from I/O performed by the trusted compute base like paging virtual memory).

- and specifically cannot observe the passage of time at any resolution.

However, such a program can:

- execute for an indefinite amount of time,
- allocate arbitrary amounts of memory,
- detect the platform endianness,
- in some JavaScript engines, observe the contents of the stack.
  This may include sensitive information about the layout of files on the host
  disk.
  In cases where the stack is data-dependent, a guest can infer the data.

>   SES occludes the stack on V8 and SpiderMonkey, but can not on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  SES occludes the stack on V8 and SpiderMonkey, but cannot on
```

  JavaScriptCore.

```js
// Claims, Figure 1
lockdown();
const compartment = new Compartment();
compartment.evaluate(program);
```

The trusted compute base includes:

- the host hardware,
- the host operating system,
- the process memory manager,

> - a minimal implementation of JavaScript conforming to ECMAScript 262 as of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- a implementation of JavaScript conforming to ECMAScript 262 as of
```

Your remaining text says more clearly what the restriction we the spec actually is. Given that, I'd remove "minimal" here as that suggests a tighter restriction than we mean.

  2021, providing no unspecified host behavior like the introduction of syntax
  that when evaluated reveals a mutable object.
  SES accounts for one such host behavior provided by Node.js, namely the `domain`
  property on promises, by preventing the use of `ses` in concert with the
  `domain` module.
- Also, any attached debugger, and
- any JavaScript that has executed in the same realm before the host calls
  `lockdown`, including JavaScript that executes after `ses` initializes.

If the host program (Figure 2) arranges for the compartment's `globalThis` to
be frozen, we additionally claim that the host can evaluate any two programs
(`program1` and `program2`) such that neither program will:

- initially share *any* mutable objects.
- be able to observe the relative passage of time of the other program,

> - specifically because they do not have access to any shared mutable state as

Reviewer: The phrasing of this bullet point is confusing. Either clarify or drop it. I think it's ok to drop it.

>   they would had they been given a reference to `Math.random()`.

Author: Clarifying elsewhere how `Math.random()` is shared state. Adding `Date.now()` to bullet above about timers.

```js
// Claims, Figure 2
lockdown();
const compartment = new Compartment();
harden(compartment.globaThis);
compartment.evaluate(program1);
compartment.evaluate(program2);
```

However no such programs (`program`, `program1`, nor `program2`) can be useful

> as such.

Reviewer: Nice! But not quite true. The host has access to the second one (completion value!), and it could be a useful pure function.

A host program is therefore responsible for maintaining any of the desired
invariants above when "endowing" a compartment with any of its own objects.

For example, a host program (Figure 3) may run two programs in separate

> compartments, giving one program the ability to resolve a promise and the other
> program the ability to observe the resolution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compartments, giving one program the ability to resolve a particular promise and the other
program the ability to observe the settlement (fulfillment or rejection) of that promise.
```
resolution by forwarding to another promise is not observable.

The host program is responsible for hardening these objects.

With such an arrangement, the host and both guest programs are vulnerable

> to denial of service.

Author: I’m assuming that no arrangement would have been made previously where host and guest are in the same JavaScript realm.

> to denial of service.

Reviewer 2: I meant in the previous example. That's what I had understood.

```js
// Claims, Figure 2
lockdown();

const promise = new Promise(resolve => {
  const compartmentA = new Compartment(harden({
    resolve,
  }));
  compartment.evaluate(programA);
});

const compartmentB = new Compartment(harden({
  promise,
}));
compartmentB.evaluate(programB);
```

> Any agent can also hide their own stack by causing client callbacks to

Reviewer 2: Why are we switching the terminology to "agent" ?

Author: Hard to find a word that isn’t overloaded, neither agent is necessarily the host, both might be guests connected by introduction. Maybe I can work a clarification in.

Reviewer: subsystem

Author: I seem to have found a way to use “any other guest or the host” instead of “agent”.

> run in a subsequent microtask.

Reviewer 2: microtask is a little obscure, maybe clarify that's done through promises?

Reviewer: microtask isn't even a JS concept. It's a browser concept.

Author: Adding: promise events.

Reviewer 2: Promise reactions?

> run in a subsequent microtask.

Reviewer 2: To be pedantic, the promise helps more in isolating the stack than hiding its info. Error taming is what hides the stack, and you could very well imagine that a JS engine exposes all sorts of async stack info through error stacks without taming.

Where isolation comes in is that an error thrown by `programB` will not bubble into and interrupt `programA`.
Also something something about stack overflows and promise resolution protecting `programB` from `programA` abuses.

Author: I’ve adopted text you’ve suggested out-of-band.

Among the ways a host program can invalidate these claims, a host can provide

- either directly or by introduction through the transitive closure over
  properties, property descriptors, arguments or returned values of functions
  or methods:
  - any shared mutable object,

>   - any resolution timer,

Reviewer 2: Or feature performing I/O

  - any undesired communication channel, for example a PRNG,

>   - any `SharedArrayBuffer` that is indeed shared,

Reviewer 2: To be pedantic, a regular `ArrayBuffer` would be sufficient in this case

Author: I mean for the purposes of leaking a high resolution timer. In the sense that an `ArrayBuffer` is a communication channel, so is a `Map`. I can clarify.

Reviewer 2: SAB is only a high resolution timer when combined with workers / threads

Reviewer: SAB + Atomics is a timer though.

Reviewer 2: Only if the agent can block. But yeah I see your point.

>   - the `Atomics` namespace object.

Reviewer 2: Actually atomics is pretty useless without `SharedArrayBuffer`

> - any function from from one agent that calls a callback from another agent on

Reviewer 2: Agent terminology again here.

> - any function from from one agent that calls a callback from another agent on

Reviewer 2: I usually prefer to use "invoke" with callback to lessen the "call" visual overload.

Author: Reworked this section entirely.

  its own stack (reentrancy hazards), including property descriptor functions
  and proxy traps.

> These responsibilities for hosts are not exhaustive.

Reviewer: I don't like the phrasing of this entire section. It sounds like we're saying these are all bad things for a host to do. Rather, I'd phrase this all in terms of enabling the host to express security policy by explicitly granting access to objects. In order to maximize expressiveness (among other things) the evaluate code starts out powerless, i.e., without any powers the host did not decide to grant.

Author: Posting a rewrite shortly.

## Audits

In June 2021, SES underwent formal third party vulnerability assessment over a
period of 4 weeks with 3 engineers and a dedicated project manager that
surfaced no unknown security issues or vulnerabilities within the code. As a
result of this assessment, [a single code change was

> made](https://github.com/endojs/endo/issues/126)to set a flag to disable the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
made](https://github.com/endojs/endo/issues/126) to set a flag to disable the
```

domain module in node.js to mitigate a known issue identified in the code.  The
code will be the subject of another round of intense application security

> review mid-2022 by a reputable application security form reknowned for their

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
review mid-2022 by a reputable application security firm renowned for their
```

and provide intentional communication channels between them.

Host programs must maintain the `ses` boundary with care in what they present
as endowments.
A host program should take care not to share mutable state with guests,
or distribute mutable state to multiple guests, such as an unfrozen object (use
`harden`), direct read and write access to a collection, like a `Map` or `Set`,
even if hardened.
Furthermore, typed arrays are collections and cannot be hardened.

For the purposes of sharing state, pseudo-random number generators (PRNG) like
`Math.random()` are equivalent to read and write access to shared state, and
any guest can use one to eavesdrop on other guests or the host that share one.

If a guest program needs a high resolution timer to function, the host should
only invite one guest to a single operating system process and limit the
activity of the host program in the same process.

Hosts must avoid exposing `SharedArrayBuffer` to guests.
Any two JavaScript programs sharing a `SharedArrayBuffer` can use the shared
buffer to construct a high resolution timer.

The `ses` shim does not in itself isolate the stack of guest programs, even

> when evaluated in separate compartment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
when evaluated in separate compartments.
```

This is relevant when program created objects are shared between guest
programs.

Any object endowed to a program (either through the per-compartment
`globalThis`, function arguments or returned values) represents a potential

> risk, such as reentrancy, when it interacts with a guest object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a program interacts with an object introduced by another program
(e.g. through the per-compartment `globalThis`, function arguments or
returned values), there are potential risks due to the synchronous nature
of object access.
```

Author: Adopted, but avoided Latin `e.g.,`.

Reviewer 2: We lost the second sentence which I believe is still valuable.

Author: Oh, my mistake again. Pushed.

## Security claims and caveats

The `ses` shim concerns boundaries between programs in the same process and
JavaScript realm.
In terms of the [Taxonomy of Security Issues](https://agoric.com/blog/all/taxonomy-of-security-issues/),
the `ses` shim creates a boundary that is finer than an operating system
process or thread and facilitates boundaries as fine as individual objects.
While `ses` can interpose at granularities where process isolation is not a
viable boundary, as between an application and its dependencies or between a
platform and a plugin, `ses` combines well with coarser boundaries for defense

> in depth.

Reviewer 2: Technically it's SES in this paragraph, right?

Author: For the purposes of the claims, I’m limiting the scope to this implementation specifically. Elsewhere, we’d refer to Hardened JavaScript. The SES Proposal is too aspirational to be useful here.

compartment.evaluate(program2);
```

> However such programs (`program`, `program1`, nor `program2`) are only

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However such programs (`program`, `program1`, or `program2`) are only
```

`harden`), direct read and write access to a collection, like a `Map` or `Set`,
even if hardened.
Furthermore, typed arrays are collections and cannot be hardened.

For the purposes of sharing state, pseudo-random number generators (PRNG) like
`Math.random()` are equivalent to read and write access to shared state, and
any guest can use one to eavesdrop on other guests or the host that share one.

If a guest program needs a high resolution timer to function, the host should
only invite one guest to a single operating system process and limit the
activity of the host program in the same process.

Hosts must avoid exposing `SharedArrayBuffer` to guests.
Any two JavaScript programs sharing a `SharedArrayBuffer` can use the shared
buffer to construct a high resolution timer.

The `ses` shim does not in itself isolate the stack of guest programs, even
when evaluated in separate compartment.
This is relevant when program created objects are shared between guest
programs.

Any object endowed to a program (either through the per-compartment
`globalThis`, function arguments or returned values) represents a potential

> risk, such as reentrancy, when it interacts with a guest object.

Reviewer 2: This may need some wordsmithing. It's not clear what `it` references to here. It should be program but the original subject is the endowed object.

Even interactions that are not explicit function calls may cause code from
another program, like property accessors or proxy traps, to execute on the same
stack, which may be able to call back into the program (reentrancy), throw, or
detect the current stack height.

A host object can defend itself from reentrancy attacks by ensuring that it

> interacts with guest objects in fresh events, as in microtasks: promise events.

Reviewer 2: I'm not a major fan of the event terminology without a more obvious reference to an event-loop. The ecma262 spec talk of jobs, which is probably even less obvious. Wondering if we can simply say something like "interacts with guest objects on a clean stack through the use of promises".

Within these constraints, a host program can provide objects that grant limited
I/O capabilities to guest programs, and even revoke or suspend those
capabilities at runtime.

The trusted compute base (TCB) for `ses` includes:

- the host hardware,
- the host operating system,
- any intermediate virtual operating systems or hypervisors,
- the process memory manager,
- an implementation of JavaScript conforming to ECMAScript 262 as of

>   2021, providing no unspecified host behavior like the introduction of syntax

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  2021, providing no unspecified embedding host behavior like the introduction of syntax
```

  that when evaluated reveals a mutable object.
  `ses` accounts for one such host behavior provided by Node.js, namely the `domain`
  property on promises, by preventing the use of `ses` in concert with the
  `domain` module.
- Also, any attached debugger, and

> - any JavaScript that has executed in the same realm before the host calls

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- any JavaScript that has executed in the same realm before the host program calls
```

  `lockdown`, including JavaScript that executes after `ses` initializes.

## Audits

In June 2021, `ses` underwent formal third party vulnerability assessment over a
period of 4 weeks with 3 engineers and a dedicated project manager that
surfaced no unknown security issues or vulnerabilities within the code. As a
result of this assessment, [a single code change was
made](https://github.com/endojs/endo/issues/126) to set a flag to disable the
domain module in Node.js to mitigate a known issue identified in the code.  The
code will be the subject of another round of intense application security

> review mid-2022 by a reputable application security form renown for their

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
review mid-2022 by a reputable application security firm renowned for their
```
